On Sunday, 10 November, tribute was paid to those who had made the ultimate sacrifice in service of their country as part of Armistice Day, also called Remembrance Day. At 05:00 on Monday, 11 November 1918, a document was signed that brought an end to the First World War. At the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month of that year, the guns fell silent. The war that was supposed to end all wars had come to an end, but not before an estimated nine million people had lost their lives. Each year, on the Sunday closest to 11 November, this historic ending of the war is remembered. The Memorable Order of Tin Hats (MOTH) of Louis Trichardt’s Turbi Hills Shellhole played hosts once again to the event on Sunday, with numerous special guests attending the memorial service and laying wreaths. Guests included, among others, Moth Chris Bezuidenhout (on behalf of the South African Air Force Association), Moth Ron Rose (in remembrance of all British and Allied soldiers), Moth André Vermeulen (on behalf of 61 Mechanized Battalion Veterans Association), Lieutenant-Colonel Craig Leeson (the officer commanding of 85 Combat Flying School on behalf of the flying school and AFB Makhado), Sergeant (retired) Rob Riddel (on behalf of C Squadron Rhodesian SAS), Charles Leach (on behalf of Lt Tim Kleinenberg), Lieutenant-Colonel (retired) Johan Louw (on behalf of 32 Battalion), Moth Peet van der Walt (on behalf of former South African special forces and 44 Parachute Regiment), Col (police retired) Gert Nel (on behalf of Koevoet) and Moth Daan Rossouw (on behalf of the Rhodesian Police Special services). A number of wreaths were also laid by individuals. “They shall wait upon you, Lord, and shall renew their strengths, they shall mount up with wings of eagles, they shall run and not be weary and they shall walk and not faint. They shall grow not old as we are left to grow old, age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn, at the going down of the sun and in the morning, we will remember them…” reads an extract of the prayer of the Memorable Order of Tin Hats (Moths) delivered during the event. 