Early one Sunday morning in June 2017, a truck collided with a cart being pulled by four donkeys. Unfortunately, the two donkeys in the front sustained mortal injuries and died during the collision. The two at the back sustained injuries, but they survived the accident. Louis Trichardt SPCA inspector Lawrence Khodobo called in the help of Flippie and Marina Joubert, who were on the scene quickly with their trailer to bring the remaining pair to safety. For the sake of the donkeys, the local SPCA in Louis Trichardt could treat and nurse their injuries, naming them Jack and Jenny while they were in the care of the SPCA. After Jenny’s pound period had elapsed, Marina felt the need to return to the SPCA to officially adopt her. Marina later decided to change Jenny’s name to Penny. Unfortunately, Marina could not adopt Jack as well. More than a year later, another accident involving donkeys occurred, in November 2018. This time a baby donkey’s mother was the victim of the collision. The foal was thankfully unscathed and was rescued by Deliene Myburg. He stayed with Patti Cooper for some time, and she bottle-fed him until he was strong enough to be taken to the SPCA to find his home at last. In August 2019, the orphaned donkey, named Eli, arrived at the local SPCA and has since been trotting around and stealing everyone’s heart. Not long after he arrived, Ger-mari Kemp came to visit the shelter and fell in love with little Eli. She quickly told her parents about him and on 10 September they came to see the love for themselves. Estelle and Hendrik Kemp, parents of Ger-mari, quickly decided that they would give a new home to Eli, as well as Jack, who had been waiting since June 2017 to find a new home. At last they both got the opportunity that they had been waiting for for so long. People who might encounter similar accidents along the road involving donkeys (or any other injured animal) are urged to phone inspector Lawrence Khodobo at 082 965 5151 for advice on how to handle the situation. 