The Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development has called upon farmers of cloven-hooved livestock to restrict the movement of these animals until the foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) outbreak in Limpopo has been stabilised. In a joint statement issued by the department and the National Animal Health Forum last week, the 1 November FMD outbreak was confirmed to have been traced back to infected animals being sold at an auction facility in Limpopo. This after veterinary services were alerted to clinical signs suspicious for FMD in a herd of cattle on a farm in the Molemole (Dendron) area. The statement also confirmed that at least five commercial facilities have been affected as a result. “More properties that purchased animals at the same auction could be affected. All known infected properties have been placed under quarantine, suspect properties under precautionary quarantine; and plans to resolve the situation are being implemented,” reads the joint statement. The department advised farmers and livestock owners that all parties transacting with cloven-hoofed animals should observe the utmost caution. “Only transport animals that are healthy and destined for immediate slaughter,” said the department. Regarding the above, the department stated that all buyers of animals should ensure that the animals purchased were free of disease, especially free of FMD. “Any transaction of cloven-hoofed animals should be accompanied with a veterinary health certificate issued by a veterinarian,” said the department. The department warned that the FMD virus can remain viable in the environment for a few days. “Thus, any transport vehicle should be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected away from any animals before animals are loaded.  Vehicles used to transport animals to abattoirs should therefore be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected before leaving the abattoir premises,” said the department. They added that in terms of Section 11 of the Animal Diseases Act of 1984, it was the responsibility of “any owner or manager of land on which there are animals … take … all reasonable steps to prevent the infection of the animals with any animal disease, or parasite and the spreading thereof from the relevant land or animals…”. “Anyone spreading FMD through the movement of animals may thus be held civilly and/or criminally liable for such offence,” they warned. The department also gave biosecurity tips for persons travelling to and from known FMD areas. They said that any person having had contact with possibly infected animals should take all precautions necessary to change clothing and footwear before handling other cloven-hoofed animals. “Anybody who is unsure of the above advice should please contact their local state or private veterinarian for biosecurity guidance and/or assistance to develop a biosecurity protocol for their farm,” said the department. People can also visit www.nahf.co.za for the FMD-Basic Biosecurity Guidelines. 