MC Mining have announced the approval by the Credit Committee of the Industrial Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) of a term-loan facility to fund the construction of Phase 1 of the Makhado hard coking coal project just north of the Soutpansberg in the Nzhelele Valley. “The term loan reaffirms the economics of the Makhado Project and follows the conclusion of off-take agreements for the coal to be produced by Phase 1. Proceeds of the loan will be utilised to develop the west pit and modify the existing Vele Colliery processing plant, with construction expected to take nine months, followed by first coal production in month ten,” said MC Mining in a press release issued on 15 July. According to the release, the Makhado Project is 69% owned by MC Mining’s subsidiary Baobab Mining & Exploration (Pty) Ltd (Baobab) with the IDC having a 5% interest and, in compliance with South African black economic empowerment requirements, seven local communities own 20% and 6% is held by a black industrialist. The term loan entails, among other things, that the IDC will advance R245 million ($17.5 million1) to MC Mining. Drawdown can take place any time before 30 June 2021 and the loan will endure for a period of seven years, following the drawdown. Capital repayments will also only commence 24 months after the first drawdown and must be repaid in 20 equal quarterly instalments. The loan is, however, subject to various conditions. This includes MC Mining’s issuing additional equity to shareholders for a minimum of R200 million ($14.3 million) and that the company settle their existing 2017 loan facility between the IDC, MC Mining and Baobab, which amounted to R184.7 million ($13.2 million) at 30 June 2019. According to MC Mining, the securing of the term loan is a key component for the development of Phase 1 of the Makhado Project. The total funding requirement for both Phase 1 and the settlement of the existing 2017 loan facility is some R700 million ($50 million). The term loan will satisfy R245 million ($17.5 million) of this, leaving a residual equity requirement of R455 million ($32.5 million). “MC Mining anticipates that an equity raise to secure the residual equity requirement will be completed in due course, enabling construction activities to commence later in the third quarter of 2019,” said MC Mining. Phase 1 is a critical step in the development of Phase 2 of the Makhado Project, which also has significant positive economics. The construction of Phase 2, which is anticipated to commence from 2022, will yield approximately 0.8 million tonnes per annum (Mtpa) of hard coking coal and between 0.9Mtpa and 1.0Mtpa of export quality thermal coal. MC Mining has already secured offtake agreements for circa 50% of the hard coking coal. “The approval of the IDC funding is a positive step for the development of MC Mining’s flagship Makhado Project. The company is positioned to become South Africa’s pre-eminent producer of high-grade metallurgical coal with long-term hard coking coal markets supported by growing global steel demand, driven by economic development and urbanisation,” said MC Mining CEO David Brown. He added that the loan reflected the IDC’s support for the development of the Makhado Project. 