Out of the 2 567 land claims lodged in Vhembe before 31 December 1998, only 196 are still outstanding. According to the Limpopo Land Claims Commission, letters will be sent to each of the claimants in the next two weeks informing them about the progress of the claims. The Regional Land Claims Commission held a public meeting on Tuesday at the Makhado Show Grounds, where hundreds of land claimants converged to listen to the progress report on the outstanding claims. “We are busy preparing detailed letters for each claim that will inform the claimant on the state of the claim. The claimants should expect the letters in about two weeks from now,” said Avhashoni Magada from the Regional Land Claims Commission. Mr Tuwani Tshotheli, the regional manager of the commission, gave feedback as to the progress made in the past two decades. He said that 2 567 claims had been lodged in the Vhembe District, of which 2 309 had been settled. They were currently finalising 52 phased claims, while 151 of the claims were in the process of negotiations. Tshotheli said that 62 claims had been dismissed, eight claims were entangled in court processes and 14 claims were under investigation. During the meeting, the challenges that the regional commission have to deal with were discussed. Tshotheli explained the administrative problems, such delays in land evaluations. One of the remedial actions proposed is a decentralisation of power that may streamline some processes. Another issue that hampers progress is when conflict exists from within the groups of claimants. Tshotheli encouraged claimants to be organised and to work together. The commission also had to deal with claimants providing false information during the verification process. This happened in cases where the claimants opted for financial compensation, which led to payments being done to bogus claimants. The remedial action proposed was to refer the cases to the Special Investigation Unit. Delays have been caused when landowners objected to the validity of the claims. In such cases a thorough investigation of the claim becomes necessary and the services of expert researchers must be acquired. Another drawback, according to Tshotheli, is when claimants engage the courts. “Whenever claimants approach courts, it will take time. We cannot deal with claims that take the court route. Courts may take more than five years to reach a settlement,” he said. After the presentation, claimants had an opportunity to ask questions. Some of the questions were answered, but most claimants were asked to approach the regional officers with their specific questions. Meanwhile, those who lodged their claims from 2014 to 2016 were advised that the claims are kept safely and will be attended to in due course. 