The collaborative efforts by various police units in Limpopo to put a stop to stock theft recently paid dividends with the arrest of four suspects and the recovery of 17 cattle. “These suspects aged between 41 and 55, were arrested during the ongoing operations from last week, comprised of the Crime Intelligence Unit, Stock Theft Unit, Task Team and the K9 Unit together with the stations’ visible policing members,” said provincial police spokesperson Col Moatshe Ngoepe. On Tuesday, 30 July, at around 07:00 three suspects aged between 41 and 42, were nabbed along the N1 just outside Louis Trichardt during an intelligence driven joint operation after the police followed up on information about suspects selling cattle in the area. The three suspects were driving a truck when stopped. “During the search, police discovered ten cattle with an estimated value of R100 000 loaded at the back of the truck. The suspects were then arrested after they failed to give a satisfactory explanation about ownership of these cattle,” said Ngoepe. The three suspects briefly appeared in court in Louis Trichardt facing charges of the possession of suspected stolen livestock. They were identified as the 37-year-old Theunis Johannes Venter, 40-year-old Selelo Stanford Maoto and 42-year-old Adzwinndini Nethonondoa. Their case was postponed until 7 August for a bail application and further police investigation. The past week, in the Mahwelereng Cluster, the Modimolle Stock Theft Unit also conducted joint operations between the R101 and N1. During the operation, members spotted a double cab bakkie with a trailer along the R101 road. The vehicle was stopped and police managed to recover and confiscate seven stolen cattle worth about R25 000. A 55-year-old suspect was arrested, while another managed to escape. Provincial police commissioner Lieutenant General Nneke Ledwaba applauded the police for their swift reaction, leading to these arrests and recoveries. He further encouraged stock owners to comply with the Stock Theft Act. Lt Nneke asked members of the community to keep working closely with the police to fight stock theft.