The Louis Trichardt Cricket Club held its annual general meeting last Wednesday and reflected on a busy year with numerous achievements. The club’s chairperson, Joubert Fourie, gave feedback on the past year’s activities during the meeting. Special mention was made of the team that managed to win the Vhembe T20 league as well as the Limpopo promotional league. The club also produced the best bowler in the provincial T20 league and the promotional league (Dirk van den Berg) and the best batsmen in the T20 league and the promotional league respectively, namely Leon Olwage and Dewald Joubert. One of the club’s junior players, Gerhardus Fourie, was named as the best U/17 player in the province. Gerhardus is also a serious campaigner for a place in the SA Under 19 team. The cricket club’s new committee members were elected during the meeting. Joubert Fourie was re-elected as chairperson of the club, with Grant Phillipson also staying on as vice-chairperson. Dirk van den Berg is the club’s secretary, while Naomi Phillipson is the treasurer. The three additional members are Paulo Piorek, Dewald Joubert and Jandré Hancke. As far as the local leagues are concerned, some fierce competition between the teams was the order of the day the past few weeks. Currently, a T20 league is in the process of being finalised. Five teams entered for this competition and the past weekend saw the semi-final rounds. Limpopo, the reigning champions, beat Strikers by 31 runs in the one semi-final. In the other semi-final, Vikings came up against Ridgeway. Vikings scored a 54-run victory to proceed to the final. The final of the local T20 league will be played on Sunday, and Limpopo will try and retain their unblemished record of the past few years. The match starts at 13:45. The club is also preparing for the Vhembe T20 league that starts in a few weeks’ time. The matches will be played on 15, 22 and 29 September. Matches will be played in the mornings as well as the afternoons. On a more social level, the club is organising a six-a-side tournament. Eight teams can be accommodated, and the entry fee is R600 per team. Entries close on 18 September and the first eight teams that have entered and paid will be accepted. For more information about the six-a-side tournament, Naomi Phillipson can be contacted at naomi@phillipson.co.za. 