The Zoutpansberg Private Hospital in Louis Trichardt has apologised to the public for the current shortage of beds experienced at the hospital. Under normal circumstances, the hospital has 32 beds available, but due to major renovations taking place at the hospital, only 20 beds are currently available. The renovation project at the hospital started in middle October last year. Phase 1 saw the building of public toilets, with Phase 2 commencing on 7 January this year. This phase will see a total revamp of the hospital’s casualty ward, nursing station and maternity ward. “Initially, we only planned to do the maternity ward’s bathroom floor and replace some areas with medical vinyl (novilon) flooring. We have since decided to redo the whole area with hospital flooring, including the nursing station, the whole maternity ward and the casualty ward,” said facility manager Mr Fanie van Zyl. To enable the contractor to complete the flooring, the hospital had to effectively close down one medical ward, the maternity ward and casualty ward. However, since they cannot go without a casualty and maternity ward, these wards were temporarily moved to the surgical ward. “The end result of the move was the loss of beds for the normal admission of medical and surgical patients,” said Van Zyl. Phase 2 of the project was initially to be completed by 15 March this year. “The extra work, however, will cause a two- to three-week additional contract time,” said Van Zyl. He added that the shortage of bed space had a severe impact on the hospital. “We are, however, pushing to have the casualty ward, nursing station and maternity ward open again within the next week,” said Van Zyl. Another big addition to the hospital will be a complete industrial container kitchen. “This will be delivered on Friday this week,” said Van Zyl. He added that Limpopo Caterers would remain in charge of supplying the food. “These are the same people catering for the MediClinics,” said Van Zyl. Another replacement scheduled for the near future is the hospital’s generator, a necessity for any medical centre, especially seen against the backdrop of a struggling Eskom and load shedding. The hospital’s current generator delivers 95 KVA, while the new generator will deliver 200 KVA. “The old generator is not broken; it has just become too small and needs to be upgraded. We will keep the old one as a back-up for the theatre,” said Van Zyl. To date, Van Zyl said, they had received no complaints other than positive criticism. “Although it’s difficult for everybody, including the doctors, everybody is excited about the planned improvements. In the end, it is about delivering a better service to the community,” said Van Zyl. In the same breath he apologized once more for any inconvenience caused by the renovations. “We know it causes a lot of noise and dust, but we are doing our best to minimise it,” said Van Zyl. 