The Louis Trichardt XI scored a narrow victory against the Nashua Aces on Sunday in a rain-interrupted match. Fortune favoured them as the Duckworth-Lewis-Stern formula gave them a two-run victory. This victory means that the LTT side ended the season on top of the log in the Limpopo Impala Promotional League. Louis Trichardt, the home side, batted first, but were quickly in a spot of trouble when the openers lost their wickets. Christo Gerber (10) and Nimesh Watekar (29) headed the attack and Dewald Joubert (35) also made a useful contribution. A flurry of wickets then caused a bit of panic. Warno Smit (80 from 61 balls) was clearly not intimidated by Aces’ bowling attack and punished the bad balls. His innings included seven sixes and five fours. He was well supported by Tovhi Nefale, who scored a sensible 28 from 38 balls. Aces’ bowlers should blame themselves for the fact that the score went past 200. They bowled no fewer than 34 wides and eight no-balls. When the last wicket fell in the 38th over, the score stood at 240. Jeandré du Plessis (3/45 in 8 overs) was Aces’ most successful bowler. Michael Botha (2/49 in 8) and Guido de Maré (2/48 in 7) also claimed two wickets each. Aces lost a quick wicket, but then proceeded to attack the bowling. Johan Viljoen (24 from 49) was steady, but Shannon Venter (49 from 25 balls) looked in devastating form. He hit five sixes before he was stumped from the bowling of Dirk van den Berg. Jeandré du Plessis (44 from 39) was also impressive, but when he fell prey to Dirk van den Berg’s bowling, the runs started to dry up. Guido de Maré (13 not out from 35 balls) was in defensive mode. When thunder and rain ended the match in the 36th over, the score stood at 160/5. The Duckworth-Lewis formula showed that Aces were two runs short of a victory. The home side ended the season as log leaders and winners of the Limpopo Impala Promotional League. The provincial league will now take a bit of a breather and will start again in September. On the local front, the cricket is continuing with the T20 league. 