The Makhado Local Municipality hosted an integrated development plan (IDP) representative forum at the local show grounds a fortnight ago. The municipal mayor, Cllr Samuel Munyai, said that the IDP was a process through which the municipality prepared a strategic development plan that extended over a five-year period. "The IDP is the principal strategic planning instrument, which guides and informs all planning, budgeting, management and decision-making processes in a municipality," he said.

He added that the core function of the municipality was service delivery. "Our task is to make sure that people have better roads, water and shelter. Working together, we can do more," he added.

The portfolio head of finance, Cllr David Davhana, said that the IDP process plan provided and represented a continuous cycle of development planning, implementation and review. "It gives way to assess the performance and achievements of targets as well as strategic objectives of the IDP review process," he added. He said that the council would adopt the 2019/20 draft IDP budget on or before 31 March 2019. "The council will have to approve the final IDP budget reviews on or before 31 May 2019," he added.

He further said that the process plan, as part of the review preparation phase, ensured that the role players within the process were prepared. "The plans of our IDP have to start at the regional level to ensure that the process is people-driven and also leads to vision in the municipality," he added.

Presenting the 2018/19 IDP projects progress report, the portfolio head of technical services, Cllr John Mamafha, said the following projects were in progress: the Tshedza-to-Vuvha access road; the Piesanghoek-to-Khunda access road; the Waterval sports facility, phase 2; Valdezia Xitacini-to-Jiweni access road, phase 2; Mudimeli bridge and access road, phase 3; the Makhado landfill site; the fencing of the Makhado municipal cemetery; and the Tshikwarani-to-Zamenkomste road, phase 3.

Mamafha said that Muraleni, Ravele, Dambuwo, Pfananani B/Tshitavha, Matsa extension, and Madombidzha 1/Tshiozwi villages would soon receive electricity.

The residents were also afforded an opportunity to raise their complaints to the municipality. The complaints included better roads, the shortage of water supply, Apollo lights for safety and cemetery fencing. 