SANRAL announced on Tuesday that it was taking alternative steps to that ensure the construction of the Polokwane Ring Road be completed as early as possible. “Plans are also in place to minimise traffic disruptions on the section of the N1 between the Shell Ultra City and the R71 (Tzaneen Road) and ensure the safety of commuters travelling on the national road south of Polokwane,” said SANRAL in a press release. According to Progress Hlahla, the regional manager of SANRAL’s Northern Region, certain measures had to be taken to complete construction work after it became known that the primary contractor, Basil Read, had filed for business rescue. The original expectation was that Basil Read might be able to get its finances back on track and resume work on the second phase of the Polokwane Eastern Ring Road. It has since become clear that this will not be achieved. Hlahla says there were two alternatives open for SANRAL. “The roads agency is in discussion with the contractor’s insurance company to find another suitably qualified and experienced contractor who could complete the works on behalf of Basil Read. SANRAL will also try to ensure that any new contractor would continue with the labour and SMME companies involved in the project,” said Hlahla in the press release. If this process is successful, Hlahla said, work can recommence in the second quarter of 2019 and current estimates are that it can then be completed within 15 months of resumption. The alternative option requires SANRAL to call for formal tenders for the completion of the outstanding work. This tender process will take at least six months to be drafted, advertised, evaluated and awarded. SANRAL said they were aware that the suspension of the project had created disruption to traffic and inconveniences for road users. “The plans we are putting in place are designed to address the problem quickly and ensure work can continue at the earliest possible stage,” said Hlahla. He added that safety assessments were done on a regular basis and measures would be implemented to ensure the safety and convenience of all road users, including motorists and pedestrians. 