The Louis Trichardt SPCA’s dream has always been to one day have an own animal clinic. That dream came true the past week when a clinic was delivered to their doorstep. “At the Louis Trichardt SPCA, one of our biggest ambitions has always been to have our own clinic. It’s been a goal we set for ourselves at every AGM, though we realized it might just be a pipe dream. But, it’s been said that if your dreams don’t scare you – you are not dreaming big enough! Also fortune favours the brave, so we cherished these aspirations and hoped that by a stroke of luck, we’d be in that privileged position. And it was so …” said local SPCA committee member Lesley Gaigher. Lesley explained that a loyal supporter of the local SPCA was offered an opportunity and made the enormously generous decision to help them make the dream of an own clinic a reality. “As anyone who has ever lost a parent would surely know, an inheritance is no substitute for their physical presence. I know our donor well and I can unequivocally say that she would rather still have her father with her instead of the investments that he bequeathed to her. But it has also opened a door for her to make a difference in so many lives that I’m sure he is smiling down on her, proudly,” said Lesley. The animal clinic will be located at the Louis Trichardt SPCA’s premises on the Vondeling road. When registered and functioning, it will bear the name “Legacy Animal Clinic”. “This is to honour a great man, his philanthropic daughter and all the role players who walked this road with our committee – like our wonderful Inspector, Lawrence Khodobo, our dedicated staff, devoted CCS vets who helped us see what is possible and those dynamic people still to come,” said Lesley. Lesley, however, stated that they want to make something very clear. “We would like to clarify that the Legacy Animal Clinic will not be a SPCA venture as such, but it will provide pro bono services to the SPCA. The intentions are to not only provide the best veterinary care for our animals, but also save funds which should be used to plough back into the community for further welfare work,” said Lesley. Another aspect that needs to be clarified about the clinic is that the SPCA didn’t buy it. As stated, it was a donation. Since the clinic was delivered the past week, rumours had it that it would seem the local SPCA is doing so well financially that they can afford “luxuries” such as an own clinic. This could not be further from the truth. “The Louis Trichardt SPCA is not out of the woods yet. Any and all expenses relating to the Legacy Animal Clinic were fully covered by our charitable donor and a few other kind-hearted individuals who pitched in and provided some much-needed advice, expertise and logistical support. We still need your backing and kindness to keep afloat and need to work to obtain funds to make sure that we can help every precious soul that comes our way. This will help us to continue stepping out and actively look for the destitute, injured and ill-treated animals in and around the immensely vast Vhembe District,” said Lesley. In conclusion, Lesley said that they and the Soutpansberg community are looking forward to exquisite care and compassion when Legacy Animal Clinic is registered and operational. “It is still a long way from being ready. We’re crossing all the t’s and dotting all the i’s to ensure that nothing will be out of place,” said Lesley.