The hard and diligent labour of well-known Limpopo heritage champion Mr Ndoweni Malala’s has been acknowledged and rewarded. On Friday, the National Heritage Council, in partnership with the Limpopo Department of Sport, Arts and Culture, acknowledged his achievements during the glittering Golden Shield Awards ceremony held at Meropa Casino in Polokwane. Malala, who is the executive director of Murongwe Enrichment Project at Khubvi, was recognised for his sterling and dedicated service in the heritage sector. In an interview with Malala after he had received the award, he could not hide his glee. “It is indeed an inspiring gesture to be recognised in this manner as a rural heritage practitioner. This will go a long way in stimulating more energy to lead or inspire the advancement of heritage matters.” Malala said that Limpopo had a diverse and rich cultural heritage that incorporated Vhavenda, Vatsonga and BaPedi, who each had a unique, active cultural lifestyle. “Our cultural heritage is a powerful agent for promulgating a South African identity and promoting the notion that our rich and varied cultural heritage has a profound power to help build our nation. We also find so much that unites us through tangible and intangible aspects of our cultural heritage,” he said. Malala dedicates much of his time to projects that promote, safeguard and preserve the cultural heritage of Limpopo. The projects include heritage symposiums where people share their experience and impart heritage knowledge across generations to stimulate social cohesion. “I draw inspiration from the tireless endeavours of our village professors (old people) who represent our rich cultural heritage with passion without seeking rewards. That inspires me to work selflessly, playing a catalytic role in creating platforms where school children and university students rub shoulders with our knowledge holders to learn more about our culture.” In accepting the award, Malala dedicated the award to all those pioneers and humble servants who had contributed significantly to the enrichment of cultural life in Limpopo. “It is servants like professor Joseph “Malume” Francis from the University of Venda and the Institute for Rural Development whose inspirational guidance and selfless servanthood propels us to do more for our rural community. A candle loses nothing by lighting another candle,” said Malala. 