The Masingita Group of Companies is incredibly proud to announce that Makhado Crossing is growing and expanding to reach new heights. “When the refurbished centre opens its doors on 21 November 2019, it will offer the Makhado community a total retail space of 35 000 m² (up from the original 14 000 m² GLA),” said the company in a press release. The new centre is the culmination of investments worth R500 million, to upgrade all tenants to align them with the new look of the centre. While the centre features anchor tenants such as Pick n Pay and a brand new Checkers, big brands such as Woolworths, Standard Bank, Absa Bank, Mr Price Home and Sheet Street have decided to relocate from town to be part of this world-class mall's vision of offering a “one-stop-shop environment” for the Makhado community. “The centre also created the perfect opportunity for new tenants like Dis-Chem, Mr Price Sport and Roman's Pizza Drive Thru to open stores in the centre. In addition to the new stores, the centre now also sports 1 400 parking bays, making it the most convenient place to meet and shop in Makhado,” stated the company. To make space for the expansion, the town's squash club, rugby club, jukskei club and pigeon racing club had to be relocated from the municipal grounds next to the centre. “This resulted in the centre's developers investing R25 million in building brand new club facilities along the Thohoyandou road. Further phases within the development of the area include a Unisa campus, petrol station and a hotel,” stated the company. According to the company, the development has managed to create around 900 jobs during the construction phase and offers an additional 300 permanent positions (at retailers, centre management, security and more). “To me it is not about enriching myself. I have the will to help the community through the creation of platforms where people can get employment to help them support their families,” said Mike Nkuna, a pioneering rural-shopping-centre developer and founder of the Masingita Group. “Customers can look forward to seeing the new look and experiencing all the offerings from the new and existing tenants, and the whole Makhado community is encouraged to come out and experience the new Makhado Crossing for themselves,” stated the company. 