SANRAL has announced that their Polokwane N1 ring-road project will resume this September with the appointment of Edwin Construction to complete the contract. The original contract was awarded to Basil Read in August 2015, with work continuing well until June 2018. At that time, the contractor began to experience cash-flow challenges, which led to the commencement of a business-rescue process. SANRAL’s Northern Region Manager, Progress Hlahla, said in a press release that Edwin Construction would continue on the original contract and had not been appointed on a new one. “In April 2019, the SANRAL board approved the appointment of the contractor to continue the work. This is allowed under the terms of the contract if both parties agree. SANRAL, Basil Read and the insurers, Credit Guarantee Insurance Corporation of Africa Limited (CGIC), have agreed that the contract will be ceded from Basil Read to Edwin Construction. CGIC will issue a new 10% Performance Bond and are assisting SANRAL to cover and off-set some of the additional administrative and CPA costs.” At a contract value of R226.5 million, excluding VAT and provision for CPA, the remaining construction work to be carried out by Edwin Construction includes completion of the new road, widening and strengthening of the old carriageway, which will become the new southbound carriageway, completion of the new intersections at the R37 (Lydenburg) and P977 (Silikon) road crossings, bridge structures, culverts, road markings, studs, signage, fencing and drainage. The contractor will also be responsible for cleaning up and finishing off the road reserve, quarries and borrow pits. “It is our hope that this project will reach completion by November 2020. Its success will increase safety and improve the flow of traffic towards the Polokwane CBD,” said Hlahla. Hlahla added that the road would remain safe throughout the upcoming festive season. “While our routine road maintenance team has been ensuring safety on the route since Basil Read suspended operations in June 2018, Edwin Construction will be responsible for traffic safety along the entire contract length. A qualified and experienced Traffic Safety Officer will be appointed, whose sole responsibility will be to look after road safety issues on a daily basis. Over the December holiday period, special teams will be on standby to carry out road maintenance activities such as pothole patching, road markings, cleaning storm-water debris and fixing signs,” said Hlahla. 