The University of Venda has initiated a project whereby local communities can reach out and assist victims of cyclone Idai. The university, with several partners, is collecting goods such as clothing, blankets and assorted donations to be delivered mainly to victims in the north-western districts in Zimbabwe. “The destruction and devastation to livelihoods that cyclone Idai has caused so far in Malawi, Mozambique and Zimbabwe are massive,” says Univen in a combined press release. The death toll has risen to over 800 and hundreds of people are still missing or unaccounted for. “People, crops and livestock were swept away or buried under rubble/soil and deposited during mudslides, and rocks/boulders. In some cases, whole sections of villages and a growth point that had about 300 houses (Kopa in Rusitu valley of the Chimanimani District in Zimbabwe) are covered with rocks. There is no trace of the former residents of the area,” it is stated. Infrastructure such as houses, school and health facilities, roads, bridges and electricity supply lines were completely destroyed. The risk of outbreaks of famine, malaria, more deaths that are avoidable and diseases such as cholera and typhoid is worsening by the day and although relief and other forms of support are reaching the affected areas, more support is still needed. “The United Nations has confirmed that the scale of destruction attributed to cyclone Idai is unprecedented in the history of Southern Africa. For several years to come, the effects of this monumental catastrophe will be felt throughout the region, in particular in the communities that were hit directly,” says Univen. “In light of the magnitude of this disaster, the University of Venda resolved to act, working together with its interested multiple partners and friends. Thus, we have mounted a coordinated campaign to mobilize assorted donations to be delivered to survivors or victims in the Chipinge and Chimanimani Districts of Zimbabwe.” Univen and with its partners want to collect what they can to assist the communities affected by the cyclone. “Donations sought include clothes, shoes, food, kitchenware: cooking utensils, bedding, toiletries, sanitary ware and diapers, furniture, medical supplies, temporary shelter such as tents, clean and safe water for domestic use, building materials for use in reconstructing destroyed houses and toilets, and cash, among other relevant items.” For further information, contact: Mr T. Dzaga (Corporate donations) - Tel.: 015 962 8112
Ms M. Mphaphathe (In-kind donations) - Tel: 015 962 9045
Ms N. Nemadodzi (In-kind donations) - Tel: 015 962 8802
Ms S. Sathekge (In-kind donations) - Tel: 015 969 2015
Dr B. Dube (In-kind donations by those based in Louis Trichardt) - Tel: 015 962 8420 