Normality has returned to the Zoutpansberg Private Hospital in Louis Trichardt with the completion of months of major renovations. The hospital is once again running at full 32-bed capacity. The renovation project at the hospital started in middle October last year. Phase 1 saw the building of public toilets, with Phase 2 commencing on 7 January this year. This phase saw a total revamp of the hospital’s casualty ward, nursing station and maternity ward. “Initially, we only planned to do the maternity ward’s bathroom floor and replace some areas with medical vinyl (novilon) flooring. We had since decided to redo the whole area with hospital flooring, including the nursing station, the whole maternity ward and the casualty ward,” said facility manager Mr Fanie van Zyl. Monday saw the official opening of the hospital’s newly installed container kitchen. The kitchen’s ribbon-cutting ceremony was officiated by Van Zyl, while hospital director Dr Anton Stroebel cut the ribbon. “Today is a special day for us as a hospital and I think specifically for the directors and the owners of the company. This is a huge milestone. It shows growth and it shows good character in the way the hospital is developing. It is great to be part of it,” said Van Zyl. The revamp also saw the hospital upgrade their old 95KVA generator to a new 200KVA generator. This was seen as a necessity for the medical centre, especially against the backdrop of a struggling Eskom and load shedding. “The old generator is not broken; it has just become too small and needs to be upgraded. We will keep the old one as a back-up for the theatre,” said Van Zyl. During the kitchen’s ribbon-cutting ceremony, Van Zyl said he saw the completion of the project as one of the highlights of his 10 years of service at the hospital. He thanked all involved, making special mention of Ms Rene Collins from Limpopo Caterers who will be running the kitchen, as well as Ms Andrea Stachen, who represented Container World in Polokwane. The company supplied the fully commissioned kitchen. A huge thank you also went to Mr Wouter Coetzer of Lanco Construction, the main contractor on the project. “He was always willing to help, even with extra worked piled on that was not part of his original contract,” said Van Zyl. 