The Limpopo Animal Health Forum (LAHF) also expressed its concern about the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) outside the controlled zone of Limpopo. “LAHF’s objective is to preserve and improve the health of animals in Limpopo as well as the rest of SA. FMD management is a standing point on the agenda of the Forum,” said the forum in a press release on Wednesday. According to the press release, LAHF continuously reiterates effective FMD management because it is in the interest to the economy of the whole of SA. “Effective vaccination and control over movement of animals in the control zone are essentials in minimizing the threat FMD poses to the national herd. LAHF is constantly assured that all procedures are in place and effectively applied. The latest outbreak brings this assurance under doubt,” said the forum. In the press release, LAHF pointed out that the condition of the international border fence of Limpopo is a point of great concern. “It makes proper border control impossible. Stray animals from neighbouring countries threaten the health of the national herd. This also threatens the export status of SA,” said the forum. They further pointed out that control over livestock movement from controlled zones to FMD-free zones are lagging behind. “Control over transport permits and proper identification of animals being transported are the responsibilities of veterinary services, the SAPS and traffic control combined. Poor training and corruption make this control measure ineffective,” said the forum. Another aspect pointed out by LAHF was that fences between controlled areas and FMD-free zones are not maintained as required, hence animals migrate between these zones, especially in drought conditions. “Control posts where chemical treatment of the wheels and lower parts of vehicles leaving the FMD control zones should be done, are not effectively operational,” the forum added. LAHF said they had repeatedly warned that poor management of the FMD situation in Limpopo might result in trade restrictions on agricultural goods from SA, with devastating financial results for farmers and the country. “It was pointed out that in such an event more than just animals and animal products can be effected. On 8 January 2019, exactly that happened when Botswana included the following in their banning of importation of live cloven animals:  ‘the importation of veldt grasses, bedding and animal manure contaminated products and vehicles are also not allowed’ [quoted from their media statement],” the forum said. Namibia announced comparable measures. The LAHF said it was concerned that the export of fruit and vegetables from SA might also be affected negatively by this outbreak. “The LAHF calls on the SA government to show its commitment to resolving this situation by putting appropriate measures and plans into place to find practical solutions that will prevent the same from happening again in future. The Corona project that was supposed to improve security on the northern border of Limpopo is lagging behind by almost three years. This project should be prioritised immediately and completed as soon as possible. This action will assist in reducing the threat of FMD from bordering countries,” said the forum. 