Alicia Thomas of the Louis Trichardt SPCA told the Zoutpansberger that the SPCA Outreach Team had had a jam-packed programme in 2018 and that they were aiming to do much more in 2019. “We started off the year with a Steri-Drive in Giyani, which was organised by the Compulsory Community Service (CCS) vet for that area, Dr Cameron Christie. Over a two-day period, the Limpopo CCS State Vets for 2019 were able to sterilise and castrate close to 40 dogs, and a few cats too.” The SPCA Outreach Team joined the vets on these days and many animals were vaccinated, dewormed and treated for ticks and fleas, and received food parcels. Alicia said that the team brought back quite a few animals that were surrendered to their care. “So, keep watching our Facebook page for their road to recovery and happy endings!” Alicia said that many chains were broken, thanks to the SPCA Louis Trichardt’s ongoing “Breaking the Chains” campaign. “We will never stop removing these awful bolts and chains at each and every opportunity that we get. Chains are keeping so many animals captive, sometimes in very harsh and even painful conditions.” The SPCA is still asking people to donate any old collars that they no longer use for their Break the Chains campaign. Many village dogs would very much appreciate being freed from their horrible heavy chains, said Alicia. “Cruelty is a stark reality and people need to stop turning a blind eye. Cruelty is heart-breaking and it is all around us, so please, if you are not able to give your time, there are so many other ways in which you can make a difference too. You are welcome to get in contact with us to find out more about our Outreach Team, if you would like to become a part of the change you want to see in the world. Phone us on 084 900 5332 or 082 965 5151.” Running these Outreach Programmes does not come cheaply, said Alicia, and they have to purchase the medicines that the State cannot provide. She said that the SPCA would like to greatly thank each and every person who donated in any way to help them to do what they do to speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves. “Thank you to our volunteers for your time, passion and love. You help make this cruel and crazy world of ours quite a bit brighter and kinder for so many animals. Thank you to our amazing team, and to Inspector Lawrence Khodobo. You are truly our pillar of strength. Thank you to field officer Patrick Mutundari and all the volunteers. Special thanks to Dr Eljane van Tonder, who is the current CCS State Vet for our area. We appreciate all that you do and are very proud to have you as part of our team. Rescuing animals will tear your heart out, stomp on it and bury it, where you often think you will never find it, then along comes another animal that digs it up and gives it back to you. And that is why we always have the strength to carry on and persevere for the next animal that needs us! We are making a difference, to matter how small it may seem. For those that we are able to help it most definitely makes the world of difference. It is easy to say that you feel sorry for animals in need, but the real passion and love for animals shines through when you stand up and actually do something about it. Now is the time and this is your opportunity!” The SPCA appreciates any and all donations.  They all make a huge difference, even if they seem small to the donors.  Financial donations can be made by marking EFTs as OUTREACH PROGRAMME for account SPCA Louis Trichardt, Standard Bank, cheque account number 282374639, branch code 052549. 