In response to a request for tips on how to train your cat, Lesley Gaigher of the Louis Trichardt SPCA is sharing some tips this week on how to train your dragon. According to her, cats are just as easy to train as dragons, so she opted to share a few pointers on the much easier task of training mainly your puppy. “Be it a dog or a cat,” said Lesley, “there are a few simple things you can do to train your new pet, so that the whole family can enjoy having it around.” The first step is to choose carefully. You must take into consideration the character traits of the breed you are contemplating to acquire and make sure it will fit into your lifestyle. A quick search on the Internet could save you and your new pet a lot of trouble, and ultimately heartache if the animal does not suit your household and will be surrendered later in its life. In the case of a puppy, you also need to consider not just the cost of the new puppy or the adoption fee, but also the financial commitment that comes with adding any animal to your household. Good quality food, vet expenses (planned and unplanned), grooming needs, toys, shelter and bedding are all things that you will need to be able to provide. To train your new puppy for the normal day-to-day routine, first pick out a name that the dog will respond to. Using a short name ending in a strong consonant that will perk up your pup’s ears when he or she hears it is wise. You need to have your house rules decided even before the new dog is brought home. Will the pup be allowed on the furniture? If the rules are settled and enforced from the get-go, fewer problems will occur later. Rewarding good behaviour with positive reinforcement is a sure-fire way to teach your pup how you need him or her to behave. Dogs want to please you and make you happy. They love being praised. A simple “good boy or girl” and a little cuddle will encourage the good behaviour to continue. Likewise, do not reward bad manners. This will only confuse your puppy. If jumping up is unacceptable, it should never be allowed - not even when you arrive home after hours away at work. Remember that dogs live in the moment. Something they did five minutes ago is long forgotten. You need to find a way to discipline bad behaviour as soon as it happens, so that your puppy can make the association between the behaviour and the correction. Training cats, and dragons, is a whole different ball game. As opposed to dogs who want to please their owner, cats are way more interested in their own comfort. Be prepared to be ignored, a lot! That does not mean, however, that training a cat cannot be done. The first thing you need to realize is that cats do not understand punishment – unless they are dishing it out. The old saying goes that you should “let sleeping dogs lie”. The only lie here is that it should have said cats rather than dogs. A comfy cat is not to be messed with, unless you are wearing oven mitts. You should realize that bad behaviour is most definitely a reaction to your actions or omissions. You need to pet your cat as soon as he or she commands it, or approach it with oven mitts. Petting your cat entails certain no-go zones, but only on some days, when approaching it with oven mitts is always the right thing. Some say you can train these little dragons to walk on leashes and to sit on command. I am sure that, with enough time and patience, it can be done, but best you invest in decent oven mi… BODY ARMOUR! All jokes aside, your new family, be it preppy pup or ferocious feline, is sure to bring you a lifetime of happiness, hours of giggles and entertainment. But, most importantly, loyal companionship and unconditional love. PS: The most loving pets in the world are RESCUES! Don’t shop … ADOPT! For more information, please phone Inspector Lawrence Khodobo at 082 965 5151. 