Louis Trichardt is surrounded by kilometres of the most beautiful wildlife areas in the world. Locals have the benefit of being able to make weekend forays into the bush and view the indigenous wildlife in one of the most popular tourist destinations in South Africa. Some of these animals can be spotted along trails closer to town, while others are to be found mainly in parks and game reserves. One such creature is the waterbuck (Kobus Ellipsiprymnus). While not an endangered species, this beautiful antelope is nevertheless interesting and worth seeking out. Although the common waterbuck is listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as being of Least Concern, indicating a low likelihood of extinction, the Defassa waterbuck is listed by them as Near Threatened, which means it could indeed be en route to extinction. While these listings apparently indicate that the opportunity to see waterbuck in their natural surroundings is unlikely to be lost anytime soon, they are a unique indigenous species to look for when visiting areas that they like to inhabit. Waterbuck were described for the first time in 1833 by the Irish naturalist William Ogilby. More recent examinations of fossils unearthed enough ancient waterbuck bones for it to be strongly theorised that their ancestral home was the eastern coast of Africa. According to figures from the African Wildlife Foundation (AWF), fewer than 200,000 waterbucks of both subspecies remain. The AWF also says that “[t]he waterbuck’s body odour is so bad that it deters predators”. This, together with the fact that they are powerful swimmers known to leap into water when threatened by predators such as lions, hyena and leopards, gives them the added bonus of being a little too stinky for all but the most ravenous water-based predators. The waterbuck’s bad body odour has long been regarded as preventing their being eaten by crocodiles, but recent studies have suggested that their unpleasant smelliness is more to ward off dangerous insects, such as tsetse flies that carry the trypanosome parasite that can cause sleeping sickness. In a study carried out, funded by the International Centre for Insect Physiology and Ecology, special collars were produced for livestock that contained the waterbuck stench which, when used, reduced tsetse-fly bites by up to 90%. The multifunctional oil released by the waterbuck not only repels potential predators, it also keeps their hair dry when they are in the water. The shaggy hair around the waterbuck’s neck provides more lift for their heads (often heavier with mature sets of horns) while swimming because the follicles are hollow, and therefore assist with buoyancy. Waterbuck have bright white rings around their hindquarters, which they use as beacons when running away from any would-be predators who are less inclined to be concerned about the smell of their food. When a member of the herd spots danger, the rest simply have to follow the retreating bullseye to safety. Waterbuck coats vary in shades of grey and brown, with white patches at the base of the throat as well as around their eyes and noses. Bulls grow much larger than cows, with some reaching weights of up to 260 kilograms, heights of 1.4 metres at the shoulder, and sporting long spiral horns. Waterbuck are to be found mostly at permanent sources of water, such as rivers or lakes surrounded by dense vegetation. They are not a species that foregoes drinking intentionally every day and they prefer lush, well-watered grass to graze on. Calves are most abundant in the summer months, although waterbuck do produce all year around. For the first few weeks, calves stay well hidden in thick foliage. Herds of six to 30 animals are common, with some comprising mainly mothers and calves and others made up of bachelors, while dominant bulls protect their territories.