Visitor management is a vital part of ensuring the best possible experience for all visitors to the Kruger National Park over the coming festive season, starting on Friday, 13 December 2019 until Tuesday, 14 January 2020. With this in mind, South African National Parks (SANParks) would like to remind day visitors to the Kruger National Park (KNP) that daily quotas will once again apply at the entrance gates. Visitors are urged to make pre-bookings for their visits prior to their arrival and there are three time slots which they can choose from, namely from 05:30 to 07:30 (time slot 1), 07:30 to 09:30 (time slot 2) and from 09:30 onwards (time slot 3). “For busy periods such as the school holidays and festive season, we aim to better manage the volumes that we expect, as well as our visitors’ expectations. The three different time slots are aimed at improving the spread of vehicles and, as far as possible prevent unnecessary waiting periods at gates,” said KNP spokesperson Mr Ike Phaahla. “The day-visitor quota for the park is a management tool to prevent overcrowding of the roads and facilities and is applied throughout the year although we mostly reach carrying capacity during long weekends and school holidays, resulting in our having to turn visitors away. Visitors will be able to book up to 80% of Day Visitor Quota per gate via SANParks Reservations offices on 012 428 9111 and online at www.sanparks.org. “Pre-booked day visitors will get preference over non-booked day visitors at the gate but must ensure that they arrive within their booked time slots. Arriving outside the booked time slot will be regarded as non-booked and therefore will not receive preference and could be turned away. These bookings can be changed as well through SANParks Reservations offices if need be.” Phaahla also reminded visitors to read the permit they receive at the gates because all the rules and regulations of the park are clearly stipulated on these documents. “Day visitors may not bring liquor as a result of the alcohol ban in public areas of the Park. Further, visitors must please also refrain from committing other infringements such as littering, feeding of animals, speeding and alighting from vehicles in places where this is prohibited in the Park. These and other Park rules are emphasized to ensure visitors have a safe and enjoyable experience, while not impacting other visitors, and hence must be adhered to at all times whilst in the Park. Visitor Management vehicles will also be on patrol, providing information to guests, visibility on the roads and law enforcement in the Park,” he advised. Visitors can report any rule and regulation infringement that they witness to the Emergency Call Centre numbers 013 735 4064/013 735 0197/076 801 9679. Visitors should also take note that day-visitor pre-bookings are subject to a non-refundable booking fee of R46 per adult and R23 per child. Day visitors who have pre-booked will still be required to pay Conservation Fees or use a valid Wild Card to enter the Park. The Conservation Fee for South African residents as well as Zimbabwean and Mozambiquan nationals (passport required to prove this) is R100 per adult and R50 per child (between ages 2 – 11). For nationals of Eswatini (previously Swaziland) and other SADC countries, the conservation fees are R200 per adult and R100 per child. For all other guests the standard conservation fees of R400 for adults and R200 for children apply. Guests planning to use Wild Cards are requested to ensure membership is valid before arrival and this can best be done online at www.sanparks.org/wild. The number and profile of persons (adults and children) on the reservation and actual persons arriving should correspond. All guests (drivers and passengers) will be required to identify themselves upon admission (by producing a South African driver’s license, identity document or passport); please ensure you are in possession of one of these documents and have them ready. Gate quotas will be applied strictly and guests without pre-bookings could be denied entry. Guests are encouraged to continuously provide feedback on their experience to customer.care@sanparks.org. (Information supplied by SANParks Communications & Marketing Department – Kruger National Park) 