More than 100 enthusiastic athletes of all ages, shapes and sizes set off for Louis Trichardt’s first ever official parkrun on Saturday, 9 February. Nine-time Comrades Marathon winner Bruce Fordyce and CEO of Parkrun South-Africa was at hand to welcome athletes and thank the volunteers who made the parkrun a reality after almost five years of planning. “Finally, at last! Louis Trichardt! Also, you know, this is a very contagious drug. So, we know that, shortly, it will be Musina, Tshipise … that’s how it goes, it travels ... So, we are thrilled to be part of parkrun,” said Fordyce in his opening remarks. Fordyce added that on Saturday, local runners not only joined the 60 000 plus parkrun athletes at 150 venue across South Africa, but also the hundreds of thousands of athletes across the world. “You are about to embark on the most exciting journey of your life, because parkrun is global. It is all over the world. As you were sleeping last night, parkrun New-Zealand, organised, by the way, by two ex-South Africans, was running. As you were waking up, parkrun Australia was running. Now it is our turn, and as we finish, parkrun Vladivostok, parkrun Russia will go and then parkrun Europe, Poland, Ireland, France, Italy, all over and after we finish, parkrun America because they are always last,” said Fordyce jokingly. The concept of parkruns is simple: You turn up every Saturday and run 5km, or if you are a junior, then 2km every Sunday. How fast you go does not matter and neither does what you are wearing. What matters is taking part. The first ever parkrun was in Bushy Park, Teddington in the United Kingdom, when 13 intrepid parkrunners got together on 2 October 2004. Fordyce introduced the parkrun concept to South Africa in 2011, with the first run taking place at Delta Park in Johannesburg. A mere 26 athletes took part. “The next weekend there was less, because it was raining,” said Fordyce. However, today the parkrun community is growing all the time – but everything is still based on the simple, basic principles formed from the start: weekly, free, 5km, for everyone, forever. To join the local parkrun family, all walkers, joggers and runners, young and old, with or without a pet or pram, need to register online by visiting https://www.parkrun.co.za/register/form/.  This single registration will allow people to take part at every parkrun event across the world and have their times registered. For more information about Louis Trichardt’s own parkrun, phone Jaco at Tel 084 616 2299.