Tribute was paid once more to the thousands of brave South Africans who marched towards certain death during the Battle of the Somme during the annual Delville Wood remembrance parade at the Moths’ Turbi Hills Shellhole in Louis Trichardt on Sunday. The Battle of the Somme is described as one of the bloodiest battles in human history. Between 1 July and 18 November 1916, more than one million men were wounded or killed on the banks of the river Somme in France. Among the soldiers killed and injured were more than 2 400 South Africans, who fought for control over a small piece of land in the northeast of France, called Delville Wood. The attack on Delville Wood was just one part of the Battle of the Somme, the Haig’s infamous “Great Push” to end the war on the Western Front. Special guests who attended the memorial service to lay wreaths on Sunday included Col N Makhovha (on behalf of the Chief of the South African Air Force and Air Force Base Makhado), Old Bill Ben Wolff (on behalf of the Turbi Hills Shell Hole and all South African Forces who lost their lives in and around Delville Wood, Chris Bezuidenhout (on behalf of the South African Air Force Association), Moth Ron Rose (in remembrance of all British and Allied soldiers who died at Delville Wood), Moth André Vermeulen (on behalf of 61 Mechanized Battalion Veterans Association), Lt-Col Craig Leeson (the officer commanding of 85 Combat Flying School on behalf of the flying school), Rob Riddel (on behalf of C Squadron Rhodesian SAS), Charles Leach (on behalf of Lt Tim Kleinenberg), Col (retired) Johan Louw (on behalf of 32 Battalion), Marius Gilfillan (on behalf of the Soutpansberg Skirmishes Heritage Association) and Godfrey Went (on behalf of local Rotarians). A special wreath was laid this year by Sandy van Niekerk in remembrance of her grandfather, Private Peter Knox, who was one of the few survivors of Delville Wood. “They shall wait upon you, Lord, and shall renew their strengths, they shall mount up with wings of eagles, they shall run and not be weary and they shall walk and not faint. They shall grow not old as we are left to grow old, age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn, at the going down of the sun and in the morning, we will remember them…” reads an extract of the prayer of the Memorable Order of Tin Hats (Moths). 