The annual Mr and Miss Eric Louw pageant took place at Eric Louw High School on 8 June, with Lewies Nel and Alida van Rensburg walking away with the respective titles. “So much beauty emanated from the function and there were so many people who opened their hearts and offered their help to make our function a huge success,” said the school. Lewies was also voted Mr Fan Favourite and Mr Staff Favourite, while Alida also walked away with the title of Miss Staff Favourite and Miss Photogenic. Other winners on the evening included David Tjapudi (1st prince), Michiel Badenhorst (2nd prince), Annika Pretorius (1st princess and Miss Fan Favourite), Anli Heydenreich (2nd princess), Boitumelo Chirwa (Miss Personality), Phenyo Leghawa (Mr Personality) and Boitumelo Mudau (Mr Photogenic). A huge thank you went to Ms Chrisna Viljoen, who had organised the event, while Anne-Marie Verster of Ribbon and Lace trained the children and supplied the crowns and décor. Other sponsors included Chris and Mara Limbach of Messina Pharmacy (prizes); Pieter and Marinus of Altra Cosa (judges' platters); Kobus and Elmari Roos of Messina Spur (prizes); Johnene Genis and Busi of Headlines (for all the hair and makeup); Pastor Jimmy and Annelise Venter of the Vollies (for the loan of the tables); Manie and Engela Gerner of The Doilie (prizes); Magnus and Adriana Crossberg (prizes); Marelize Steyn of Lee-Antè Retreat (prizes); Serendipity (roses); Brian Kalshoven and Jacques Thysse (photos);  Alwin Dorman and Chrisna Viljoen (MC); judges Mr Johan Minnie, Ms Cathy Davies, Ms Annemarie Verster, Ms Kim Groenewald, Ms Samantha Jansen, Ms Charmaine Thapelo and Mr Armand Viljoen;  Septimus Oosthuizen, Maryke van Zyl, Alvin Dorman and Chrisna Viljoen (singing and piano items); Kyle Siebert (music); Annamarie Parkin (décor); Tracy Knoetse and Thea van Rensburg (arrangements); Marilette Steyn (sashes), the student representative council and all who attended the special event. “Last, but not least, all the participants - a big thanks to you. You were amazing on the ramp, and wonderful to work with. You are each unique and winners in our eyes. If there's anyone we’ve missed, many thanks to you too. We appreciate everyone's help and support,” said the school. 