The Ultimate Guesthouse outside Louis Trichardt received yet another feather in its cap by being voted one of the provincial winners in the prestigious annual Lilizela tourism awards. The guesthouse walked away with the award for 3-Star Accommodation Services in Limpopo. “To win this is one of the paramount accolades in the South African tourism industry,” said guesthouse manager Amay O’Connell. The awards ceremony took place at The Ranch Resort outside Polokwane on 18 September. As a provincial winner, The Ultimate Guesthouse is now a finalist in the national Lilizela Awards ceremony to take place in Pretoria on 9 November this year. “It’s a major honour that the Ultimate family plans to build on while going forward. We now know what our extended family (guests) enjoy and we look forward to exceeding their expectations even further," said O’Connell. In the same breath, she referred to their motto: Arrive as guests, leave as friends. According to O’Connell, hospitality for them is simply an opportunity to show that you love and care. “We appreciate every vote that we received and the continuous support from our family and friends,” said O’Connell. The Ultimate Guesthouse (Lodge) is a unique and cosy accommodation facility that caters to their guest’s every need to ensure a relaxing and memorable stay. They offer warm and comfortable accommodation with friendly service and uncompromised hospitality, ensuring that their guests receive the best service that they deserve. The guesthouse/lodge is committed to creating memories for its guests that will bring them back to this splendid setting on top of the Soutpansberg Mountain Range with a stunning view of the mountains, beautiful landscapes and vegetation that can only be found in Louis Trichardt. The guesthouse is situated just of the N1 on the Bluegumspoort road. The guesthouse/lodge offers a full a la carte restaurant that is also fully licensed, ideal for a small function of small family get-together to create those unique memories. The venue is ideal for travellers en-route to the Kruger National Park, Musina, Zimbabwe, Mapungubwe and Venda. 