The Democratic Alliance (DA) said on Monday they would write to the MEC for Transport, Mr Dickson Masemola, to recommend the introduction of a register of offenders for all traffic officials and officials who commit serious transgressions or violate the law. This comes after several recent cases of traffic officers and officials who have been arrested for crimes such as bribery and corruption. Last Wednesday, the Hawks’ Serious Corruption Investigation unit, in collaboration with the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) and the Special Investigative Unit (SIU), arrested 10 suspects at a privately owned vehicle testing station in Marble Hall as part of Operation Corolla. The suspects allegedly used the identity particulars of unsuspecting individuals to issue roadworthy certificates for scores of vehicles that were never brought to the station for physical examination. On Monday, 14 October, the Hawks (again in conjunction with the RTMC and SIU) also arrested four Phalala Vehicle Testing Station officials, three of whom were re-arrested for allegedly continuing to issue fraudulent vehicle roadworthy certificates. The three suspects were previously arrested on 9 April this year by the same team for allegedly also using the identity particulars of unsuspecting victims to authorise roadworthy certificates for vehicles that were never physically subjected to mandatory tests. On 12 April, they were each granted R1 000 bail and warned not to commit similar offenses. Closer to home, in March and April this year, the Hawks arrested eight suspects from the Thusalushaka Testing Station in Musina on similar charges of issuing roadworthy certificates for vehicles that were never subjected to mandatory tests. The DA said in their press release that these arrests showed that the Limpopo Province was currently facing a mounting challenge of traffic officials and officers who had turned to corrupt or fraudulent activities to supplement their income and this was unacceptable. They argued that a register to keep record of all these transgressions was necessary to help keep the roads safe. “The register will assist the department to keep record of all officers found guilty of serious transgressions or crimes and will also assist in monitoring whether officials who are found guilty have been subjected to consequence management or proper disciplinary action,” the press release reads. According to the DA, the register would also help the department identify the municipalities that have serious problems in terms of corrupt officers and fraud and allow for intervention to address the problem. “Corruption cannot be allowed in our traffic law enforcement in Limpopo. The issuing of falsified or bogus roadworthy certificates and officials who accept bribes and are corrupt can lead to the loss of lives on our roads and there is a need to prevent this. The DA is committed to rooting out corruption and ensuring that Limpopo roads are safe for all who use them,” states the DA. What remains to be seen, however, is how many of the arrested suspects will end up being prosecuted successfully. This after it came to light that all charges against the eight accused in the Musina case had been provisionally withdrawn. “Provisionally withdrawn simply means that the case will temporarily be put aside until all the instructions are complied with or attended to,” explained Hawks spokesperson Captain Matimba Maluleke upon enquiry. 